---
title: I fell for fraud
date: 2020-05-10
tags:
- personal
---

# I fell for fraud

Saturday afternoon as I was mentally getting ready for the kids bedtime and
drinking a Martinez (ooh, get me, though it was my first cocktail of the year,
and no, I don't count G&T as a cocktail), I received a notification that O2 had
failed to process my latest bill and that I should update my details.

My card had been updated recently and I'd had a slew of emails telling me that
recurring payment had failed…though the last wasn't for a good few weeks.

With half and eye on my phone and partially aware of how O2 were being rubbish
by asking for all my personal details that they should already have, I dutifully
posted my details off a lucky fraudster.

<!--more-->

Here's the SMS I received:

> O2: Payment for your latest bill could not be processed by your bank. Please
> update your payment information via: https://myo2․bill231․com?o2=2

The URL then asks me to sign in, I did, and enter my address, I did, and enter
my bank card and bank details, I did.

100% absent mindedly.

It's how accidents happen. My focus was on something else whilst my thumbs were
on autopilot on my phone dolling out my details.

What's ironic is that my career is on the web and these kinds of hazards are
part fo the territory and yet as seasoned as I think of myself I still made a
simply and potentially costly mistake.

But the web we live in today is a bit of a jungle and sadly part of that is
walking through long grass with snakes under foot. We conduct ourselves
carefully and we navigate from one site to the next, and we protect ourselves
with software, policies and knowledge, but what's important is that a bite from
the snakes are not fatal.

It's how quickly you or I react to the incident that makes all the difference.
Thankfully as soon as I hit send I realised my mistake.

The process was:

- Consider every data point I shared with the fraudster website
- For bank details (in my case), immediately contact the bank and block the card
- Revoke any passwords shared (I already use 1password so I know the password is
  unique)
- On going for the follow weeks, monitor the bank account to watch for unknown
  transactions - this is particularly important as the fraud web site had my
  account details which gives them enough to start a new direct debit (but this
  is also covered under direct debit protection)

The longer term changes that I'm putting in place are:

- (Though I know it) never follow a link to enter banking details, always type
  the target web site in manually (i.e. if O2 contacts me, I visit O2 myself,
  not via a URL)
- Adopt a new policy for receiving text messages which currently are almost
  exclusively 2FA codes, so it's almost worth disabling SMS messages entirely.

---

I've had exactly two previous fraud events in my past, both of which I learnt
hard lessons from, but perhaps were unavoidable (unlike this more recent event).

The first was around 10 years ago, I received a direct message on twitter from a
friend saying that some account details had been hacked and I should update my
password immediately. I promptly followed the DM link inside the Twitter app,
entered my password and … realised I'd been duped.

Following the link from _inside_ Twitter's client meant that the URL bar was
hidden from me, so I had no visual way of knowing what site I was on - it looked
like Twitter (which was the point) so I fel for it. Since then I always disable
"in browser" linking on apps I use.

The second was around 15 years ago. My laptop had been written off in an
accident and it was sent to the insurance company, they paid me insurance money
and the machine was to be destroyed. Except it wasn't. A few months after the
incident, I was contacted via email telling me that this person had my laptop in
front of them and was going to wipe the drive so that it could be resold.

Obviously this was a massive failing on the insurance company (I'm not with them
any more and I forget _who_ they were), but the individual on the other end of
the email was just doing their job. He specifically got in touch to ask if he
wanted me to send the contents of the drive before it was wiped.

I figured it might be a useful thing and said to go ahead. Except, he stated he
couldn't get all the files off the drive, some were behind my password. I was
hesitant when he asked for my password so he could send the files along, but
said it made no difference to him as he was just helping me out, and "oh, I see
you're a web developer, we need our web site redoing, maybe we could hire you…"
and off my password went.

As soon as I hit send (yes, reoccurring theme) I felt my gut drop. It was a
horrible feeling knowing that I'd just let some stranger into a personal space
such as my hard drive. I emailed him back immediately, specifically requesting
proof the drive had been wiped … but of course I never heard back.

Thank the stars there was nothing important on the drive, passwords or anything
sensitive and the thought haunted me for months, but nothing came of it.

Suffice to say I've never uttered a password again.

One additional policy I adopted after these events were that if a service was
trying to authenticate me, particularly over the phone, it would have to be a
call that _I had made_ and not them contacting me. This is similar to the policy
of entering a URL manually and not following links.

I guess we live and learn.
